---
abstract: |
    Building on the fiscal sociology paradigm, and the importance of the
    income tax for state-building, this paper outlines the conditions under
    which endogenous investments in fiscal institutions were most likely to
    occur in Chile and more generally in Latin America, starting in 1900.
    The paper contributes to the literature on state and fiscal development
    by presenting a historical comparative macro-structural argument
    centered on inter-elite conflicts. I use the case of Chile to sketch the
    theory, and several analyses of panel-data to suggest a possible
    generalization of the argument. My analyses and case study strongly
    suggest that strong states saw the emergence of a strong industrial
    sector with enough economic and political leverage to interrupt the
    political monopoly held by the landed elite which had inherited its
    privileges since colonial times, leading to subsequent sectoral
    compromises.
author:
- |
    <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Héctor Bahamonde</span>\
    [^1] PhD Candidate $\bullet$ Political Science Dpt. $\bullet$ Rutgers
    University\
    `e:`[`hector.bahamonde@rutgers.edu`](mailto:hector.bahamonde@rutgers.edu)\
    `w:`[`www.hectorbahamonde.com`](http://www.hectorbahamonde.com)
bibliography:
- '/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Bibliografia_PoliSci/Bahamonde_BibTex2013.bib'
- '/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Bibliografia_PoliSci/library.bib'
csl: '/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Bibliografia_PoliSci/APA_Style.csl'
title: |
    **Sectoral Origins of Income Taxation: Industrial Development and The
    Case of Chile (1900-2010)**
---

[`here`](https://github.com/hbahamonde/IncomeTaxAdoption/raw/master/Bahamonde_IncomeTaxAdoption.pdf).

Introduction
============

According to most political economists, fiscal sociologists, development
economist and economic historians, fiscal capacities are a prerequisite
for state-building. With a few exceptions, much effort has been devoted
to understanding the relationship between the politics of taxation and
state capacities in a number of European cases. While the bulk of
research on Latin America has mostly focused on recent tax reforms, the
*origins* of the fiscal Latin American state remain relatively unclear.
Since wars in Latin America have been rare, it is difficult to extend
models based on external threats originally developed to understand the
medieval European case. Furthermore, existent theories for the Latin
American case have usually focused on in no more than a couple of cases,
compromising their generalizability. Building on the fiscal sociology
paradigm, in this paper I propose that the development of the modern
fiscal apparatus in Chile was product of sectoral conflicts and
compromises between the industrial and agricultural political elites.
The paper also presents several panel-data analyses to suggest that this
theory could be potentially generalizable to other countries in the
region.

Much effort has been devoted to the study of *tax reforms*.
@Fairfield2013 studies different strategies policymakers pursue to tax
elites starting in 1990. @Mahon2004 and @Focanti2013 study the causes of
tax reform in Latin America starting in the 1980s and 1990,
respectively. Similarly, @Ross2004 studies the relationship between
taxation and representation between 1971 and 1997, whereas
@Sokoloff2007a study the evolution of tax institutions comparing the
U.S. with Latin America. This paper contributes to the literature on
state and fiscal development by presenting a historical comparative
macro-structural argument centered on inter-elite conflicts. The
argument outlines the conditions under which endogenous incentives to
investment in fiscal institutions were most likely to happen in Latin
America starting in 1900. An elite divided on an *economic* cleavage is
at the same time divided on their *political* preferences, particularly
regarding their attitude towards state centralization.[^2] Consequently,
an elite split along economic interests will use state power to
influence certain policies and hence, growth and state building. The
connection between state-building, fiscal development and sectoral
conflicts is hardly new.[^3] For example, @Gallo:1991kx [7-8] studies
the Bolivian case and the origins of the fiscal apparatus from a
sectoral perspective as well. @Waldner:1999aa [3] proposes that “levels
of elite conflict determine whether state transformation occurred
simultaneously with or before popular incorporation,” while
@Saylor:2014aa [8] looks at the “coalitional basis of state building.”
Building on this literature, the contribution of this paper is twofolds:
(1) to present an argument stressing the sectoral divide between the
agricultural and industrial sectors, arguing that such divide captures
the tension between the set of institutions that helped perpetuate the
predominance of the landowning elites since colonial times and another
set of institutions proper of a modern state, and (2) to provide
quantitative evidence in support of the idea that the income tax was an
important additional building block in the development of the fiscal
apparatus.

I argue that the further development of the fiscal apparatus (and
consequently, further state-building development) in Latin America, was
product of an inter-sectoral conflict that took place around in early
1900’s between the agricultural elite and an emerging and politically
excluded industrial sector. While the process of state-building had
started earlier, the income tax was an important additional building
block in that process. Critically, the tax was not important because of
the new revenue it collected, but because its implementation required a
series of sectoral domestic compromises, while its administration
triggered a series of other institutional investments. While the genesis
of the conflict was economic, its consequences were political. When
agricultural political elites were challenged by a strong industrial
economic sector, the income tax law was imposed early in history, tying
countries to a path of institutional development. However, when
agricultural elites were not challenged, landowners were never
challenged and there were less pressures to centralize the state, making
less likely further institutional investments.

The conflict was between a set of institutions that helped perpetuate
the predominance of the landowning elites since colonial times and
another set of institutions proper of a modern state. Before the income
tax law was implemented, political institutions and social norms,
largely inherited from the colonial period, were designed to promote
biased agricultural development, benefiting the landowning class only.
The emergence of a new industrial sector rose a new
politically-disenfranchised elite who demanded political and economic
reforms beneficial to them. In exchange for these demands, the
industrial sector accepted to be income-taxed. In this paper, two such
demands are identified: the opening of the political system, marking the
beginning of the 19th century *oligarchic* republics in Latin America,
and the first manifestations of protectionist organized groups which
were fundamental during the ISI time. What permitted the industrial
sector to make those demands was their continued rapid growth and their
expanding economic leverage. Both the taxation and the oligarchic
political competition dimensions led to a series of other institutional
investments such as the implementation of checks-and-balances mechanisms
(to monitor tax spending) and the development of skilled bureaucracies
with enough know-how to collect and administer the revenues of the tax.
In turn, protectionist tariffs helped the industrial sector to expand
further. One important positive externality was the development of a
strong urban middle class which supplied the state with a critical mass
of educated individuals. Importantly, industrialization altered the
political and economic status quo not by rising incomes (*á la*
modernization theory) but by nurturing a political challenger. Hence,
what caused political development was not industrialization *per se*,
but the development of a political competitor. However, when industrial
output was slow, agricultural elites faced higher opportunity costs, and
industrial demands were not considered, keeping the small and weak
industrial class excluded from politics. Institutional development in
these cases was weak and came in late.

Some scholars situate the relevant state-building critical juncture at
the end of the colonial period, before the class compromises I identify
in this paper. @Kurtz:2013aa for example explains that the first
critical juncture corresponds to the post independence political
economy, stressing whether local rural elites recruited their workers
through servile means or not, while @Soifer2015a [6] argues that the
critical tipping point is whether “local administrators were outsiders
in the communities in which they served.” Both critical junctures
happened *before* 1900, the time span studied here. This paper builds on
this literature, and while it recognizes that the process of
state-building started earlier, the paper identifies the income tax as
an important *additional* building block in that process. Some others
have argued that the economic divide was not *inter* but *intra*
sectoral. As an example, @Saylor:2014aa explains that the divide
consisted on an export/import oriented cleavage which did not overlap
with an industrial/agricultural cleavage. I borrow from the *balanced
growth* model, and follow @Dixit:1973aa [325] (and several others) in
that an economy divided in agriculture and industry provides a
significantly better description of the economy because “it reflects
several vital social and economic distinctions.” In the same vein,
@Johnston1966 [280] explain that “\[t\]he reality found in most
underdeveloped countries approximates this dichotomy \[...\]
sufficiently.” The dual nature of the economy has been widely accepted
and forms part of “a long tradition in development economics.”[^4] For
example @Lindert1985 [354] explain that the dual-sector model “has
become the dominant paradigm used by Third World observers.” In fact,
@Diaz1966 [25] argues in his classic series of papers that in Argentina
“while the correspondence between exports and rural products, and
between imports and manufactured goods has not been perfect \[...\] such
correspondence has been quite close.” Similarly, @Bergquist1986 [8]
explains that “Colombia’s two traditional political parties \[...\]
reflected in many respects the dual nature of the Colombian economy.” In
this paper I present the Chilean case in more detail. Finally, my
argument considers that agriculturalists had been a hegemonic group
protected by practices inherited from institutions originated in
colonial times, and that the modern strong industrial elite challenged
those privileges. However, a number of scholars have argued that the
independence wars made collapse all colonial institutions. For example
@Mahoney:2010aa [191] explains that the “wars of independence were
violent and destructive; they saw the collapse of the colonial fiscal
system \[...\] and the elimination of the colonial political order.”
@Saylor:2014aa [55], @Uribe-Uran:2001aa and @Lopez-Alves:2000zl [27-28,
35-36] are other examples. However, the collapse of a number of
institutions does not necessarily mean the collapse of the legacies of
‘*the* colonial political economy.’ @Capoccia2007 [349] argue that
“\[e\]ven where various institutions are interconnected, the occurrence
of a critical juncture for one institution need not constitute a
critical juncture with respect to all of its counterpart.” Following
their advise of finding “the decision-making process, \[and\]
identify\[ing\] which decisions were most influential,” I find in this
paper that in Chile the landed elite did have privileges that the
industrialists did not have *because* of the inertia of colonial
institutions. In fact, elsewhere I find that the implementation of the
income tax reverted this inertia, putting countries in a path of
*economic* development.[^5] In this paper I focus on *political*
development. Next explains the literature on the sectoral origins of
fiscal development and state-building, then I the case of Chile, then in
the econometric section I show different panel-data , and then some
final remarks.

Taxation and State Formation\[fiscal:sociology\]
================================================

The *fiscal sociology* paradigm proposes that the great modern cleavage
was not the rise of capitalism (Marx) nor the rise of modern bureaucracy
(Weber), but the rise of the “tax state,” which developed institutions
to penetrate individual economies.[^6] Given this high degree of state
penetration, taxation offers the key for a theory of the state.[^7]
Borrowing from this literature, this paper argues that the origins of
the fiscal apparatus are rooted in sectoral and class conflicts. In
fact, some have even argued that “tax struggles are among the oldest
forms of class struggle.”[^8]

*Not* all kinds of taxes play a state-*formative* role. Broadly
speaking, there are two general types of taxes, *indirect* and *direct*
taxes. Indirect taxes are, for the purposes of this paper, taxes that
are collected by a third party, i.e. not the state. Indirect taxes do
not need the development of a strong fiscal apparatus. According to
@Best1976 [53], “indirect taxes are but substitutes for direct taxes,”
and hence they are typically administered by weak states.[^9] Since
indirect taxes are easier to levy, this kind of revenue is generally
considered “unearned income”[^10] or “easy-to-collect source of
revenues.”[^11] Given the low costs states have to incur to collect
indirect taxes, they have a nearly null impact on state-building, stable
domestic alliances and bureaucratic development. In fact, when early
Latin American states depended heavily on the taxation of international
trade, the state apparatus tended to be less developed.[^12] Since
customs administrations have always been concentrated in a few critical
locations, especially ports, tariffs and customs duties did not require
an elaborate fiscal structure.[^13]

What played a formative role was the implementation of income taxation,
which I argue is a “state-building” institution. Since direct taxation
involves a compulsory transfer from private hands to the government
sector for public purposes,[^14] it is harder to collect,[^15] requiring
stronger domestic alliances to sustain these kinds of policies. Of all
types of direct taxation, the most invasive one is the *income tax*.
This type of tax demands the development of stronger institutions, as it
classifies and transfers private income into public property.[^16] From
a historical standpoint, its introduction “was one of the major events
in fiscal history that contributed to the growth in government observed
during the past 150 years.”[^17] Political alliances should exist to
overcome logistic, institutional and political domestic challenges
associated with direct taxation. Critically, economic elites, should
agree to comply with direct taxation[^18] and inter-elite class tensions
should be resolved prior to adopting these policies. As others have
pointed out, since tax revenues depend upon the interests of different
classes as they attempt to use state power for their own purposes,[^19]
class conflicts are more likely to resolve in favor of direct taxation
where income inequality *among the elite* is low.[^20] Here I argue that
the rise of an economically strong industrial elite put pressures on
these polities for a series of inter-elite compromises, endogenously
creating the incentives to overcome the initial lack of administrative
skills necessary to collect direct taxes. As others have also
explained,[^21] since income taxes require extensive monitoring and
enforcement, “administrative constraints are identified as the main
constraint to the ability of states to collect \[an\] income tax.”[^22]
When the income tax was imposed late in history, after the formative
period, they did not reflect early sectoral conflicts and eventual elite
compromises. Thus, cases in which the income tax law was imposed very
late developed incompetent bureaucracies and low levels of state
development. For example, Chile imposed the income tax law in 1924, and
the *Servicio de Impuestos Internos* is among the finest tax
institutions in Latin America. However, Guatemala imposed the income tax
law very late, in 1963, and by 1967 the national income tax office
employed 194 people, and only 9 of whom had graduated from college.[^23]

Unpacking the Mechanisms: Chile 1850-1950\[unpacking\]
======================================================

Historians still debate whether agriculturalists and industrialists
comprised two different elites. Some claim that this dualism is
incorrect.[^24] They argue that there was a blurry class division
between the mining, banking and agricultural sectors.[^25] For example,
landowners were also invested in industry.[^26] However, others have
pointed out that it was common practice that industrialists had to
invest in real state *just* to obtain credit. @Kirsch:1977aa [59]
explains that “in a *rural society* land offered one of the best
guarantees for loans \[since\] loans could not be secured by equipment,
machinery, or inventory. Only real estate was acceptable
collateral.”[^27] There were also instances where miners were invested
in banking. However, @Segall1953 argues that Chilean bankers, after the
crisis of the mining sector around the 1870s, acquired a number of
mineral deposits given as collateral years before. All in all, the lack
of dualism seems confounded by the very demands and practices of how
these predominately agricultural societies were structured.

Here I argue that initially the political economy was dominated by
agricultural political interests. @Keller1931 [13] argues that in all
Latin American economies during and right after the colonial period,
agriculture was the most important sector, while @Wright1975 [45-46]
points out that the economic interests of the agricultural elite were
the only economic interests represented in politics, and Chile was not
the exception. In the same vein, @Collier:2002db [106] argued that
initially the “national government was dominated by the central part of
the country, with owners of large agricultural holdings playing a
predominant role.” Similarly, @McBride:1971fv [15] explains that
“Chile’s people live on the soil. Her life is agricultural to the core.
*Her government has always been of farm owners. Her Congress is made up
chiefly of rich landlords*. Social life is dominated by families whose
proudest possession is the ancestral estate.”[^28] Finally, I have shown
elsewhere that political institutions and social norms inherited from
the colonial period were designed to allocate economic inputs (and hence
*growth*) in a way that benefited the landowning class only.[^29]

There existed an important asymmetry. While the industrial sector was
growing, they were kept from participating in politics with the same
privileges and conditions landowners had. Being the industrial elite
blocked, it was easy for the agricultural elite to produce policies that
were designed to enhance only their sector, even at the expenses of the
industrial sector. @Zeitlin:1984aa [13] argues that “landowners
controlled both the vote and the labor power of the agrarian tenants
(*inquilinos*) and dependent peasants (*minifundistas*), and this was
the *sine qua non* of their continuing political hegemony.” In Congress,
and the presidency itself, landowners were the single most important
group,[^30] leaving the modern sector heavily under-represented. As
@Baland2008 [1748] argue, “\[c\]ongressional representation was heavily
weighted in favor of rural districts.” For example, immediately
following independence in 1823, the secretary of the treasury, Diego
José Benavente, addressed a predominately *agricultural* congress to
propose an agricultural income tax. The congress rejected his idea,
especially due to pressure from the landowning class.[^31] Indeed,
fiscal pressures in favor of agricultural taxes were minimal compared to
mining taxes,[^32] leaving the agricultural sector systematically - and
substantially - undertaxed relative to other sectors.[^33] Though
eventually an agricultural income tax was imposed, it was weak and was
abolished after the civil war of 1891. This bias was consistent with
other state practices. Historians explain that “\[i\]n those areas where
the government did interfere in the countryside, the effect was to
strengthen the position of the landowning class.”[^34] For example, the
little public infrastructure that existed benefited the agricultural
sector. The state would either invest huge amounts of money or borrow
resources to build infrastructure capable of mobilizing agricultural
goods, starting with the gold rush in both California and
Australia.[^35] Presidents were not the exception. For example, “the
Montt regime did invest in the construction of Chile’s railways but only
in the Central Valley and south-central zones \[b\]ut there was no
public investment \[...\] in railroads built in the Norte Chico mining
provinces.”[^36] Critically, agriculturalists engaged in several
predatory practices as well. Agricultural exports in Chile, such as
wheat production, had a boom between 1865 and 1880.[^37] However,
“\[t\]he importance of trade taxes as sources of public revenues began a
steady decline in 1918, which lasted until 1925.”[^38] As some
historians have argued, agricultural incumbents engaged in
“nationalization by means of naturalization, government intervention,
and government participation.”[^39] For example, Chile, Perú and
Uruguay, among others, went through a clear process of nationalization
of non-agricultural assets during the 1920s.[^40]

For nearly 400 years, mining was the most important activity outside of
agriculture. Minerals had to be processed near where they were mined in
order to keep transport costs to a minimum, leading to the construction
of foundries and refineries, which became the cornerstones of the early
industrialization processes.[^41] While mining elites made their
fortunes during the 1840s and 1850s during the mining boom,[^42] “Latin
American’s consumption of industrial metals continued to be very small
until toward the end of the nineteenth century.” Moreover, mining was
also rudimentary, with little or no technological refinement.[^43]
Eventually, the mining sector failed to catch up with more efficient
technologies better suited to exploit low-grade ores,[^44] and
collapsed.

After the mining boom, mining elites shifted their focus to what is
considered the first *true* industrial work which, unexpectedly, began
under agricultural auspices: the cotton mills.[^45] The first industries
were called *obrajes*. Though servile labor and slave labor were used at
the end of the colonial period, all labor was free and wage-earning
starting the independence. “Large-scale *obrajes* existed alongside
smaller units of production - modest workshops and prosperous
artisan-dominated enterprises - in virtually all urban centres.”[^46]
Beyond textiles, early industrialists processed other agricultural goods
such as animal grease and tallow (for soap and candles), dried and cured
meats, flour, bread, beer, wines and spirits, being most of them for
domestic consumption.[^47] Later, around 1900, other industries for
domestic consumption such as tobacco, pottery, felt hats, matches and
footwear also developed.[^48] The industrial sector was boosted by
favorable international conditions as well, many times stimulating a
positive complementarity between two industries. For example, “\[m\]eat
exports required the development of cold-storage technologies.”[^49]
From an international trade perspective, @Haber2005 [5] argues that
given a change in the metallic standard, “exchange rate depreciation
resulted in the expansion of the tradables sectors at the expense of
non-tradables.” Lower transportation costs and higher demand for
processed grains in Europe also played a big role in boosting early
industrial production. As @Bauer:2008kx [68] argues, “\[b\]ad harvests
in Europe and disruptions caused by wars were other factors that enabled
Chilean grain to be sold on European markets.” In sum, industrial
activities started very small,[^50] progressing “from the shop to the
factory during the latter half of the nineteenth century.”[^51]
Importantly, modern industrialization did *not* begin with ISI, but
around 1900. In fact, @Haber2005 [2] finds that the “development of
large-scale, mechanized (and even “heavy”) industry can be dated back to
the 1890s.”[^52]

In Chile, the industrial elite was composed by an incipient, yet strong
and cohesive group of individuals. As historian Francisco Encina
explains, “\[i\]t was precisely this segment of the dominant class that
consummately personified the development of Chilean capitalism
(mineowner and banker, railroad magnate and manufacturer, shipper and
trader, *hacendado* and miller were \[...\] not only close associates,
or drawn from the same family, but they were the same
individuals).”[^53] In the process of going from mineowners to
proto-industrialists, this incipient elite developed a strong sense of
social *class* that led them to consistently seek political
representation and influence. Sectoral interests were organized as
follows. The *Sociedad de Fomento Fabril* (SOFOFA) was founded in 1883
to represent the interests of the the industrial sector against the
interests of the agricultural sector, represented by the *Sociedad
Nacional de Agricultura* (SNA), founded 45 years earlier in 1838. The
SNA “was the most powerful associational interest group in
nineteenth-century Chile,”[^54] and according to @Wright1975 [51], it
clearly thought of itself as a social class. Both sectors had class
consciousness. @Kirsch:1977aa [41] explains that the founding of the
SOFOFA clearly reflected a “tension created by the *awareness* of the
incongruence between the actual exploitation of economic forces and the
potential that could be extracted from them through
industrialization.”[^55] And the party system was a reflection these
sectoral-economic tensions. In fact, @Collier:2002db [109] explain that
the *Alianza Liberal* was “the political expression of the new groups
that began to emerge in the late 19th century with the expansion of the
commerce and industry and the opening of the new mining areas \[...\] As
these groups gained social and economic importance, they began to emerge
as a political force.” And by the 1920s, industrialists started to “form
trade associations to engage in lobbying and propaganda as more coherent
interest groups.”[^56]

While both economic sectors were *similarly developed*, only the
agricultural elites had access to fair political representation, leaving
industrial interests too exposed, putting pressures for these two
‘antagonistic elites’[^57] to confront each other in two bloody civil
wars. @Zeitlin:1984aa [23] argues that the civil wars challenged a
“large landed property \[elite against a\] productive capital
\[elite\].” However, war was not sustainable over time. Given their
relative similar degrees of economic development, both elites could
mobilize armies with relatively *similar capabilities*.[^58] War was
then more likely to exhaust all existent assets without producing
positive outcomes for either sector.[^59] Consequently, Chilean
agricultural and industrial elites opted for a political compromise.
Three institutional components were incorporated in the compromise: an
income tax, industrial protectionism, and equal access to the state. The
faster the industrial growth, the higher the pressures to impose a tax
to capture increasing industrial incomes. This is in line with
@Besley:2011aa [59] who argue that “investing in fiscal capacity becomes
more attractive \[...\] when wages or incomes \[...\] are higher.”[^60]
In 1924 the income tax law was passed. As others have observed,
“\[t\]here was visible bargaining: \[the non-agricultural sector\]
(reluctantly) accepted taxation, *while demanding state services and
expecting to influence how tax revenues were spent*.”[^61] The SOFOFA
pursued an agenda in favor of protective industrial tariffs. This goes
in line with @Lederman2005 [53] who argues that the timing of
protectionist and income taxation cycles matches, and with
@Sokoloff2007a [122] who explain that the expansion of “manufacturing
production \[...\] helped to nurture the development of a powerful
constituency for higher tariffs.”[^62] In particular, “by the early
1920s Chile’s manufacturers were no longer just demanding (and
obtaining) protective tariffs, they actively lobbied for government
subsidies to establish a range of new industries.”[^63] Eventually, the
Aguirre Cerda government in 1939 created the CORFO, an agency that
planned, directed and supported emergent industries by providing
“various sorts of credits, subsidies \[and\] government
investments.”[^64] This was of the greatest importance since the money
market was primarily established to “meet the credit needs of
landowners.”[^65]

These political compromises triggered a series of other investments in
state institutions and infrastructure. The early Chilean government “was
able to impose a substantial tax \[...\] and pay the salaries of
government and military employees.”[^66] Importantly, the income tax law
was influential beyond the capital city of Santiago, reaching the whole
territory. *Artículo 104* and *Artículo 105* of the income tax law[^67]
empowered all municipalities to collect the tax. In fact, municipalities
had to send to the central government a detailed list of taxpayers
*twice* a year, forcing the implementation of local bureaucracies able
to count and classify the population not only according to their
personal incomes, but also to the sources of this income. In turn,
protectionist tariffs helped to develop an even stronger industrial
sector, which in turn was the basis for the new middle class, the most
important ingredient in the development of the modern bureaucracy.[^68]
The aperture of the political system, while breaking the
agricultural-led political monopoly, also helped the industrial class
gain influence over how the income tax was spent. Critically, both
elites channeled their sectoral demands through political institutions.
The connection between political aperture and the emergence of the
industrial sector in Chile has been mentioned before. @Collier1977 [683]
points out that “the real story of Chilean industrialization belongs to
the Parliamentary period,” which goes from 1891 to 1925. In a similar
vein, @Kurtz:2013aa [36] explains that the incorporation of *all* major
upper-class actors into the national political system was crucial to
enabling substantial taxation, public goods provision and essentially,
state building.[^69]

Econometric Analyses\[methods\]
===============================

This paper argues that the origins of the modern fiscal apparatus are
explained by the rise of a new elite who challenged the political
economy of the early 20th century Latin American countries designed to
benefit the landowning class. Last presented the case of Chile. Now I
test this argument statistically using a middle-sized N panel-data
design in an effort to suggest that this hypothesis could be generalized
to other countries in Latin America. Following the economic development
typology suggested in @Mahoney:2010aa [5], nine polities were selected.
Three ‘higher level’ countries (Argentina, Chile and Venezuela), three
‘intermediate level’ countries (Mexico, Colombia and Perú), and three
‘lower level’ countries (Ecuador, Nicaragua and Guatemala). I proxy
sectoral leverage and specifically, the degree in which the industrial
elites could challenge incumbent landowners, using industrial and
agricultural sectoral growth rates. Specifically, I use the
[MOxLAD](http://moxlad-staging.herokuapp.com/home/en?) data.[^70] The
dataset spans from 1900 to (potentially) 2010.[^71] According to
@Astorga2005 [790], these data provide extended *comparable* sectoral
value-added series in constant purchasing power parity prices.[^72]
Using secondary information, states *when* the income tax was
implemented, what specific law it was, and its corresponding source(s).
shows both sectoral outputs (independent variables) and the year when
the income tax law was passed (dependent variable). Since population has
been associated with the probability elites expand the franchise,[^73]
and consequently the tax base, I include total population as a control
variable.

<span> c c c C C</span>\
<span>**Country**</span> & <span>**Available Data**</span> &
<span>**Year Income Tax**</span> & <span>**Law**</span> &
<span>**Source**</span>\
\
\
Chile & 1900 - 2009 & 1924 & *Ley* 3996 & @Mamalakis:1976kx [20] and
[LeyChile.Cl](https://goo.gl/OMbImM) (official)\
\
\
Peru & 1929 - 2009 & 1934 & *Ley* 7904 & @GobiernodelPeru1934
(official)\
\
\
Venezuela & 1936 - 2006 & 1943 & *Ley* 20851 & *Gaceta Oficial*
(official) and @Ventura2013 [27]\
\
\
Colombia & 1900 - 2009 & 1935 & *Ley* 78 & @Figueroa2008a [9]\
\
\
Argentina & 1900 - 2010 & 1933 & *Ley* 11682 &
[Infoleg.Gob.Ar](https://goo.gl/UkWq7W) (official)\
\
\
Mexico & 1900 - 2009 & 1965 & *Ley de Impuesto sobre la Renta* &
@DiazGonzalez2013 [130-133] and [Diario Oficial](https://goo.gl/A3zDVJ)
(official)\
\
\
Ecuador & 1939 - 2007 & 1945 & - & @Aguilera2013 [135]\
\
\
Nicaragua & 1920 - 2009 & 1974 & *Ley* 662 &
[Legislacion.Asamblea.Gob.Ni](https://goo.gl/JGcA9p) (official)\
\
\
Guatemala & 1920 - 2009 & 1963 & *Decreto* 1559 & @De2007 [165]\

Before start estimating models, it is important to rule out the
possibility that income taxation and sectoral development are not linked
through a spurious, time-dependent relationship. The occurrence of the
outcome of interest (taxation) should not be directly related to time
itself, but to the rise of the industrial elite proxied by industrial
growth. Within the framework of survival analyses, shows the failure
rate of the sample average country of implementing the income tax if
industrial development had increased by half (‘rapid’) or not
(‘slow’).[^74] The figure strongly suggests that the implementation of
the income tax law is largely accelerated when the size of the
industrial sector increases, and that this relationship does not depend
directly on time.

shows 5 models.[^75] Following @Aidt2009a, Model 1 computes the lagged
conditional hazard ratio of a country which has not yet adopted the
income tax adopts it in a given year as a function of the relative size
of the agricultural and industrial sectors.[^76] Countries drop out of
the sample when they adopt the income tax. Model 2 is also a Cox
regression, but with lagged logged variables. By including
time-transformed variables, in the form of a lagged dependent variable
(to account for partial adjustment of behavior)[^77] or “the use of the
natural log transformation \[to capture\] different forms (or “shapes”)
of the baseline hazard,”[^78] Models 1 and 2 are specially well-equipped
to account for possible time dependency. Model 3 shows the estimated
coefficients of a generalized estimating equation (GEE). Generalized
estimating equations were introduced by @Liang1986 to fit clustered,
repeated/correlated and panel data.[^79] This method is especially well
suited when the data are binary.[^80] GEE methods require analysts to
parameterize the working correlation matrix. Though @Hedeker2006 [ 139]
explain that “the GEE is robust to misspecification of the correlation
structure,”[^81] @Zorn2006 [338] explains that whereas the choice of
estimator makes little or no difference, the unit on which the data are
grouped makes a big difference. Hence, following the advice of
@Hardin2013 [166], who point out that when “the observations are
clustered (not collected over time) \[...\] the exchangeable correlation
structure” should be used, I assume an “independence” working covariance
structure, which corrects for small-sized panel designs.[^82] From a
substantive standpoint, GEE models provide an estimated marginal mean,
or the *weighted average* of all cluster-specific effects (or
conditional means). Model 4 is a conditional logit (or “fixed effects”
model). One important advantage of this strategy is the ability to
account for country-specific effects. For example, fiscal development
could be a function of country-specific prior state-building
capacities.[^83] A number of scholars rightly argue that post-colonial
state capacities are in part a function of pre-colonial
state-capacities.[^84] Fixed-effects should be able to account for this
and other unobserved or hard-to-measure covariates, which if left
unaccounted for, would introduce omitted variable biases.[^85] Model 5
accounts for possible spatial-temporal dependence.[^86] Given that most
of the countries I am modeling are contiguous neighbors, it is
reasonable to expect a “domino” effect. Theoretically, being the first
country to implement the income tax does not require the same level of
domestic effort than being the last one. Early-implementers have no
prior experience and hence, it should be harder for them to pass the
law. To account for this possible spatial-temporal dependence, a
cumulative count of countries which have implemented the law at time $t$
was included.[^87] All in all, the models suggest that the rise of a
strong industrial sector largely accelerated the implementation of the
income tax law. Moreover, a strong agricultural sector not only has zero
impact on fiscal development, but a negative one (models 1, 3 and 4).
Both pooled results in model 3 and model 4 give the same results.
Importantly, model 4 accounts for country-specific non-measured sources
of variation, such as country-specific prior levels of state and fiscal
capacities, cultural and geographic differences, among others. I do not
find that there was spatial-temporal dependence (model 5).

Using the estimations from Model 1 in , I follow @Gandrud2015 and
@King2000, and in simulate 1000 times the Hazard Rate of implementing
the income tax law conditional on industrial and agricultural growth
rates.[^88] Even though the outcome of interest does *not* depend
*directly* on time,[^89] countries in time *do* experience an increase
in their sectoral outputs.[^90] Consequently, it will be necessary to
account for the natural tendency of sectoral outputs to grow in time by
allowing estimations to vary with time.[^91] Since the Hazard Rate “is
the probability that a case will fail at time $t$,”[^92] I take
advantage of this quantity of interest which allows dependency on both
time *and* the covariates.[^93] strongly suggest that the faster the
agricultural sector develops, the less likely the implementation of the
income tax is. This relationship does *not* change at later stages of
development, suggesting that polities with a strong elite of landowners
(proxied by increasing levels of agricultural growth) are not associated
with fiscal development. However, rapid industrial development is
associated with the implementation of the income tax. The stronger the
industrial sector, the faster the tax is implemented, suggesting that
the rise of a new elite invested in sectors different than traditional
agriculture (industry) contribute to state-building by accelerating the
modernization of the fiscal apparatus (proxied by the income tax law).
This relationship gets stronger as time progresses *and* industrial
growth cumulates. All in all, suggests that the rise and eventual
development of an elite with no ties to colonial institutions put
pressures for the development of a modern fiscal apparatus.

Discussion: Slow Industrial Growth and Lack of Contestation\[discussion\]
=========================================================================

Historically, agriculturalists had been a hegemonic group protected by
practices inherited from institutions originated in colonial times.
Those norms had been survived due to institutional inertia, perpetuating
their advantaged position. The emergence of a strong industrial elite
invested in industry altered not only the structure of the economy but
also the inter-sectoral balance of political power, making unsustainable
the political monopoly run by the landed elites. All in all, the Chilean
case suggested that the income tax was product of a series of
inter-sectoral compromises that were possible due to the increased
leverage this new elite accumulated. The income tax, as a state-building
institution, led to further institutional investments. And the
panel-data analyses strongly suggested that this argument could be
extended to other cases.

The paper claimed that countries with fast industrial growth rates
nurtured an industrial class strong-enough to challenge the traditional
sector, forcing landowners to grant political concessions to
industrialists. One of the most important concessions was the opening of
the post-colonial political system, which granted access to industrial
organized groups. Importantly, the industrial elite accepted the income
tax in exchange for the ability to participate in equal terms in
politics. In terms of economic compromises, the industrial sector
managed to articulate its demands as a coherent class, including in the
bargain protectionist industrial tariffs. And such, the mechanisms
specified in the paper stress the idea that it is inter-elite *equality*
what causes state formation and cooperation, not inter-elite inequality
as other scholars have claimed.[^94] Industrialization was important as
a *contestation* device, not in the way modernization theorists have
argued. That is, it was not faster *overall* economic growth what helped
to form modern state institutions, but balanced *sectoral* growth that
led to the emergence of a political challenger. Finally, the process of
state-building had started earlier, way before the implementation of the
income tax (as others have correctly observed), but the implementation
of the income tax was an important building block in this process.

[^1]: I thank Bob Kaufman, Dan Kelemen, Doug Blair, Christopher Zorn,
    Paul Poast, Matthias vom Hau, Dídac Queralt, Florian Hollenbach,
    William Young, Jose Pablo Silva and participants of the 50th LASA
    Congress for all the useful comments. I also thank the School of
    Arts and Sciences at Rutgers for a pre-doctoral research grant and
    the Department of Political Science at Rutgers University for
    conference travel funds. All errors are my own.

[^2]: See for example @Llavador2005.

[^3]: Public economists usually focus on tax revenues. However, higher
    revenues do not mean higher stateness levels. For example, since
    American institutions were deliberately designed to limit the
    exercise of state power, the U.S. taxes very little
    (@Fukuyama:2004nr [6]). However, it is not reasonable to say that
    the U.S. has a “weak state." Here the focus is on the *politics* of
    taxation.

[^4]: @Kelley:1972zl [8].

[^5]: @Bahamonde:2017aa.

[^6]: @Moore2004a [298]. This view is also shared by @Schumpeter:1991yq
    [100] and @Lewis:1965nr [42] - See epigraphs.

[^7]: @Musgrave1992 [99].

[^8]: Goldscheid (1925), in @Campbell1993 [168].

[^9]: This view is also supported by @Moore2004 [14].

[^10]: @Moore2004a [304].

[^11]: @Coatsworth2002 [10].

[^12]: @Campbell1993 [177].

[^13]: @Bertola2012 [132].

[^14]: *Cfr.* Raja Chellia, “Trends in Taxation in Developing
    Countries,” in @Migdal:1988nr [282].

[^15]: @Kurtz:2013aa [62].

[^16]: @Musgrave1992 [98].

[^17]: @Aidt2009a [171].

[^18]: @Best1976 [71] argues that the “actual composition of taxes can
    be viewed as dependent upon the distribution of power rather than as
    an expression of the free choice of the majority of the people.”

[^19]: @Best1976 [50].

[^20]: @Tani1966 [157] explains that the absence of “wealth groups”
    makes passing an income tax law easier.

[^21]: @Lieberman2002a [99].

[^22]: @DiJohn2006 [5].

[^23]: @DiJohn2006 [5].

[^24]: See for example @Mamalakis:1976kx [125].

[^25]: @Bauer:2008kx [30, 44, 94, 108].

[^26]: @Kirsch:1977aa [57, 95] who cites @Bauer:2008kx. See also
    @Coatsworth2002 [23] argue that “\[t\]he only landowners that
    mattered in 19th century Latin American politics were those for whom
    land represented but one asset in a much broader portfolio.” In the
    same vein, @Bauer:2008kx [180] argues that “\[m\]iners and merchants
    bought haciendas but landowners in turn invested in banks, insurance
    companies, commercial firms and the incipient industrial sector.”

[^27]: Emphases are mine.

[^28]: Emphases are mine.

[^29]: @Bahamonde:2017aa.

[^30]: @Bauer:2008kx [45].

[^31]: @Sagredo1997 [306] It is important to stress that during this
    period, “political parties” did not follow very clear ideological
    divisions. Most of the secretaries/ministries were recruited because
    of their technocratic skills.

[^32]: As explained, mining was one of the first manifestations of
    industrial activity.

[^33]: @Best1976 [56]. @Bauer:2008kx [81] provides a very plausible
    explanation for why the agricultural sector was “structurally”
    protected against taxation. As he explains, “\[t\]he availability of
    an easily accountable source of public revenue - bags of nitrate or
    bars of cooper - meant that any need for the Chilean government to
    intrude into the affairs of landowners was reduced \[...\] the state
    kept its political hands off the countryside until the overwhelming
    urban demands for more food and political support in the 1960s.”
    @Zeitlin:1984aa [38] also points out that “public revenues came
    almost exclusively from taxes on mining and its exports.”

[^34]: @Bauer:2008kx [118].

[^35]: @Rippy:1971rz [@Marichal:1989bh; @Zeitlin:1984aa; @Bauer:2008kx].

[^36]: @Zeitlin:1984aa [41].

[^37]: @Bauer:2008kx [68-69-70]. See also @Lederman2005 [55]. Custom
    duties declined also in several other Latin American countries. For
    the Bolivian case, see @Gallo:1991kx [95]. For a general overview,
    see @Bulmer-Thomas2003 [245].

[^38]: @Lederman2005 [54-55]. He continues: “This downfall is explained
    by the fall of export revenues caused by the collapse in the prices
    of Chile’s major exports during the war,” while @Gallo:1991kx [148]
    adds, “the economic crisis of the 1930s forced most Latin American
    states to shift their sources of revenue from export-based to
    domestic economic activities.”

[^39]: @Rippy:1971rz [238].

[^40]: @Chua2010. @Bulmer-Thomas2003 [255, 342-343] explains that it was
    very common to nationalize assets such as transport companies,
    financial institutions, and mining industries.

[^41]: @Bertola2012 [129].

[^42]: Most, if not all of the mineral-related industry was
    foreign-owned, except in Chile (@Rueschemeyer:1992 [165, 176,
    footnote 5, 324]).

[^43]: @Rippy:1971rz [230].

[^44]: @Kirsch:1977aa [53].

[^45]: See @Rippy:1971rz [231]. As @Bethell2008 [271] argues, “\[t\]he
    first power looms were brought \[in Perú, Ecuador, and Venezuela\]
    in the 1840s, 1850s; but in all three they were a failure, some of
    the early mills in Ecuador being destroyed by an earthquake. It was
    not until after 1890 that the textile industries of these nations
    began to operate with reasonable success. Guatemala’s first cotton
    mill was established in 1882, and between that date and 1910 a few
    mills appeared in Chile, Argentina, Uruguay, and Colombia.”

[^46]: @Bethell2008 [271]. Emphasis in original. Flour mills were very
    important too, and they experienced a number of technological
    improvements. “The flour mills were probably the first of the
    Chilean industrial plants to utilize steam power” (@Rippy1948
    [300]). Eventually, around 1900, the steam-powered stone mills were
    replaced by a “roller process of milling which employed a mechanized
    metal cylinder system often run by electric power” (@Kirsch:1977aa
    [38]).

[^47]: @Bethell2008 [272]. Other food industries, such as sugar were
    used in the production of chocolate, candies, biscuits (@Bertola2012
    [129]). Vegetable oils were also very important.

[^48]: Specially in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Perú
    (@Rippy:1971rz [235]).

[^49]: @Bertola2012 [129].

[^50]: @Marichal:1989bh [@Rippy1948 68].

[^51]: @Rippy:1971rz [235].

[^52]: Similarly, @Rippy1948 and @Pfeiffer1952 explain that by the
    1870’s the carriage industry was on a firm basis. @Bertola2012 [129]
    finds that the “fact that manufacturing was alive and thriving in
    Latin America before the 1929 crash is now beyond question.”

[^53]: In @Zeitlin:1984aa [30], emphasis in original. He describes
    several last names which are still associated with the Chilean
    elite, such as Ossa, Edwards, Vicuña Mackenna, Matta, Goyenechea,
    Cousiño, Urmeneta, Gallo and Subercasaux. Emphasis in the original.
    Similarly, @Wright1975 [48] supports the thesis that nitrate
    development led to the development of an “incipient industrial
    establishment.”

[^54]: @Wright1973 [244].

[^55]: Emphases are mine.

[^56]: @Weaver:1980vn [107].

[^57]: @Keller1931 [37-38]. @Geddes1991 argues that competition between
    two rival parties of about the same size creates clearer incentives
    to invest in political institutions.

[^58]: @Boix:2015aa.

[^59]: Richard Salvucci in @Uribe-Uran:2001aa [48].

[^60]: Similarly, see @Campbell1994 [647] who explain that “economic
    development should be directly related to individual and corporate
    income tax rates.”

[^61]: Carmenza Gallo, in @Brautigam2008 [165]. Emphases are mine. She
    refers specifically to nitrate producers.

[^62]: See for a similar view @Haber2005 [18].

[^63]: @Haber2005 [18].

[^64]: @Collier:2002db [393].

[^65]: @Kirsch:1977aa [59].

[^66]: @Bauer:2008kx [80]. He refers particularly to taxes on “nitrate
    exports.”

[^67]: *Decreto* number 1269. See .

[^68]: @Rueschemeyer:1992 [185].

[^69]: Similarly, @Kurtz2009 [481] argues that where “no faction can
    easily become permanently dominant,” state capacities should be
    stronger. @Cardenas2010 [40], in his formal and empirical models,
    also finds that the “concentration of political and economic power
    reduces the incentives to invest in state capacity.”

[^70]: “These data build on the studies and statistical abstracts of the
    Economic Commission for Latin America, but also rely on Mitchell’s
    International Historical Statistics, International Monetary Fund’s
    International Financial Statistics, the World Bank’s World
    Development Indicators and a variety of national sources.” I used
    the *agriculture value-added* and *manufacturing value-added*
    variables. The former measures “the output of the sector net of
    intermediate inputs and includes the cultivation of crops, livestock
    production, hunting, forestry and fishing.” The later “\[r\]eports
    the output of the sector net of intermediate inputs.” Both of them
    are expressed in local currency at 1970 constant prices.

[^71]: As I explain later, I test this argument within the duration
    model approach. Since countries are censored once they implement the
    income tax law, they leave the sample *potentially* before 2010.

[^72]: Using a similar strategy, @Thies2005a also uses data on taxation
    and compare those data between cross sections.

[^73]: @Engerman2005 [892-893].

[^74]: ‘Failure’ in this case means ‘implementing’ the income tax law.

[^75]: All tables were produced using the `texreg` package
    (@Leifeld:2013qr). All Cox models were computed using the
    `survival R` package (@Therneau:2015zr). The GEE logistic regression
    was computed using the `geepack` package (@Hojsgaard:2016). This
    paper was written in LaTeX using the dynamic report `R` package
    `knitr` (@Xie:2016hl), for fully replicable research. The
    simulations were performed using the `simPH R` package
    (@Gandrud2015).

[^76]: I do not combine both variables nor do I construct an index.
    Since I am interested in the contribution of each individual sector
    in the acceleration of the implementation of the income tax law
    (keeping constant the other), keeping both variables by separate is
    a better strategy. See .

[^77]: @Wawro2002.

[^78]: @Box-Steffensmeier2004 [75].

[^79]: @Zorn2006 [322].

[^80]: @Hanley2003a.

[^81]: @Carlin2001 [ 402] argue that “\[r\]elatively minor differences
    in estimates may arise depending on how the estimating equations are
    weighted, in particular within the generalized estimating equation
    (GEE) framework.” @Westgate2016 and @Gardiner2009 [ 227] make the
    same point.

[^82]: @Hardin2013 [166] explains that if “the number of panels is
    small, then the independence model may be the best; but \[analysts
    should\] calculate the sandwich estimate of variance for use with
    hypothesis tests and interpretation of coefficient,” which is what I
    report in .

[^83]: I thank Matthias vom Hau for this suggestion.

[^84]: @Wimmer2015a [10], @Mahoney:2010aa and @Lange2006 [1426].

[^85]: @Angrist:2008fk.

[^86]: I thank both Christopher Zorn and David Darmofal for this
    suggestion.

[^87]: I clustered the standard errors at the counting variable level.
    Clustering by the counting variable allows me to cluster by early or
    late implementers.

[^88]: @Box-Steffensmeier2004 [15] explain that the Hazard Rate is the
    most common quantity of interest analysts focus on. shows 90%
    confidence intervals.

[^89]: Please refer to .

[^90]: Please refer to .

[^91]: The economics literature refers to these kinds of time series
    ‘integrated’ or I(1) processes.

[^92]: @Licht2011 [231].

[^93]: @Box-Steffensmeier2004 [15].

[^94]: @Boix:2015aa [73] argues that states only exist to counteract
    potential conflict between agents with *different* economic
    interests and military capacities.
